# Field methodologies

We have undertaken repeated trials to establish strong field sampling protocols that are effective, efficient and repeatable under a variety of different situations. Our validated methodology is briefly as follows: Upon arrival at the sample site, precaution signs are placed to reduce any risk of contamination from bystanders and to ensure current social distancing rules are followed. To reduce contamination and to create identifiable contamination from team members, we all wear the bright orange, 100% cotton field gear (including COVID-19 compliant facial coverings). This allows us to discount orange fiber pollution, as bright orange pigments are rare in our samples anyway, from our analyses.

Before undertaking sampling, data on site water temperature, wind speed/direction, current speed/direction, weather conditions and tide are recorded. A wide-mouth mason jar filled with 100 ml of ultra-pure water (Milli-Q) is used as an air control and is opened to the surrounding air anytime the filter cartridges or sample jars are exposed to air to capture any potential levels of contamination during processing. Once sampling is started, the three filters are removed from their clean storage jars and mounted within the filter housings on the system in the correct order (Figure 2.1.1). To reduce any potential contamination, the system is first cleaned with a backflow (“Cleaning mode” in Figure 2.1.1) wash of 1 μm filtered water using a 1 μm filter mounted on the pump-filter system frame. We then take a control sample by running in “sampling mode” (Figure) using 1μm filtered water. This control provides a procedural control to ensure the system is clean and viable for sampling, our expectation is that there should be no or very minimal contamination within the system. The 3 filter cartridges are then switched out of the system (stored in glass jars) for clean filters. Any water found in the filter housings that held the filters is also stored poured in a glass jar so it can be processed along with the filter. The system is then ready for seawater sampling (“sampling mode” in Figure 2.1.1). We are still working to define our total sampling volumes, but our trials have so far shown that we can often pump 20-50 gallons, depending on site conditions (i.e., amount of organic or sediments in the water column), before the filters become blocked and pumping rate falls to zero. To continue pumping if we do not reach the target volume, we remove the smallest filter size (10 μm), and replace that with a fresh clean filter (both filters are processed in the laboratory). This allows us to pump over 50 gallons to collect a high volume sample that is size fractionated into our major size classifications, > 280 μm, 280-100 μm and  100-10 μm. Once filtering is finished, all filters and water within the filter housings are removed and stored in glass jars for transport to the laboratory. The system is then washed with fresh water and dried to prevent rust. Further details on how the pump-filter system is run can be found in the standard operating protocol for the plastic spike trial in the appendix (Appendix 1).
